## Introduction

Scientists' roles in society include identifying important topics of study, undertaking an investigation of those topics, and disseminating their findings broadly.
The scientific enterprise is largely self-governing: scientists act as peer reviewers on papers and grants, comprise hiring committees in academia, make tenure decisions, and select which applicants will be admitted to doctoral programs.
A lack of diversity in science could lead to pernicious biases that hamper the extent to which scientific findings are relevant to minoritized communities.
Furthermore, even though minoritized groups innovate at higher rates, their novel contributions are discounted [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1915378117].
One first step to address this systemic issue is to directly examine peer recognition in different scientific fields.

Gender bias among conference speakers has been recognized as an area that can be improved with targeted interventions [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003903; @doi:10.1126/science.caredit.aaw9742; @doi:10.1038/ni.3707; @arxiv:1502.06326].
Having more female organizers on conference committees is associated with having more female speakers [@doi:10.1128/mBio.00846-13].
At medical conferences in the US and Canada, the proportion of female speakers is increasing at a modest rate [@doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2019.2103].
Gender bias appears to also influence funding decisions: an examination of scoring of proposals in Canada found that reviewers asked to assess the science produced a smaller gender gap in scoring than reviewers asked to assess the applicant [@doi:10/djc5].

Challenges extend beyond gender: an analysis of awards at the NIH found that proposals by Asian, black or African-American applicants were less likely to be funded than those by white applicants [@doi:10.1126/science.1196783].
There are also potential interaction effects between gender and race or ethnicity that may particularly affect women of color's efforts to gain NIH funding [@doi:10.1097/ACM.0000000000001278].
Another recent analysis found that minority scientists tend to apply for awards on topics with lower success rates [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaw7238].
This finding might be the result of minority scientists selecting topics in more poorly funded areas.
Alternatively, reviewing scientists may not recognize the scientific importance of these topics, which may be of particular interest to minority scientists.

We sought to understand the extent to which honors and high-profile speaking invitations were distributed equitably among gender, race/ethnicity, and name origin groups by an international society and its associated meetings.
As computational biologists, we focused on the [International Society for Computational Biology](https://www.iscb.org/) (ISCB), its honorary Fellows as well as its affiliated international meetings that aim to have a global reach: [Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Intelligent_Systems_for_Molecular_Biology) (ISMB) and [Research in Computational Molecular Biology](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Research_in_Computational_Molecular_Biology) (RECOMB).

We used multiple methods to predict the gender, race/ethnicity, and name origins of honorees.
Existing methods were relatively US-centric because most of the data was derived in whole or in part from the US Census.
We scraped more than 700,000 entries from English-language Wikipedia that contained nationality information to complement these existing methods and built multiple machine learning classifiers to predict name origin.
We also examined the last authors for computational biology publications to establish a field-specific baseline using the same metrics.
The results were consistent across all approaches: we found a dearth of non-white speakers and honorees.
The lack of Asian scientists among keynote speakers and Fellows was particularly pronounced when compared against the field-specific background.
