## Results

### Curated Honorees and Literature-derived Potential Honorees

We curated a dataset of ISCB honorees that included 412 honorees who were keynote speakers at international ISCB-associated conferences (ISMB and RECOMB) as well as ISCB Fellows.
The ISCB Fellows set contained the complete set of Fellows named (2009--2019).
Keynote speakers were available for ISMB for all years from 1993--2019.
Keynote speakers for RECOMB were available for all years from 1997--2019.
We included individuals who were honored multiple times as separate entries.
For example, Christine Orengo was a keynote speaker at RECOMB 2004 and became an ISCB Fellow in 2016, and thus was counted twice in this list.

We sought to compare this dataset with a background distribution of potential speakers, which we considered to be last or senior authors of bioinformatics and computational biology manuscripts.
We used those published in [Bioinformatics](https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics), [BMC Bioinformatics](https://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/), and [PLOS Computational Biology](https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/) as a set of bioinformatics and computational biology manuscripts.
We downloaded the metadata of manuscripts published in these journals from PubMed, which provided almost 30,000 articles for evaluation.
However, although PubMed provides author order, it does not provide corresponding author information.
To determine corresponding authors for an article, we used the PMC corresponding author information when it was available (20,696 articles) and the PubMed last author as a fallback when corresponding author information was missing (9,053 articles).

### Assessing Gender Diversity of Authors and Honorees

Although _Bioinformatics_ was established in 1998 and _BMC Bioinformatics_ in 2000, the metadata for these journal papers before 2002 only have initials for first and/or middle author names.
Therefore, without first and middle names, we do not have author gender predictions before this year.

We observed a slow increase of the proportion of predicted female authors, arriving at just over 20% in 2019 (Fig. {@fig:gender_breakdown}, left).
We observe very similar trend within each journal, but estimated female proportion has increased the most in _BMC Bioinformatics_ (see [notebook](https://greenelab.github.io/iscb-diversity/10.visualize-gender.html#sup_fig_s1)).
In recent years, ISCB Fellows and keynote speakers appear to be more evenly split between men and women compared to the population of authors published in computational biology and bioinformatics journals (Fig. {@fig:gender_breakdown}, right); however, it has not yet reached parity.
Further, taking all the years together, a Welch two-sample t-test did not reveal any statistically significant difference in the mean probability of ISCB honorees predicted to be female compared to that of authors (t~418~ = 0.753, _p_ = 0.226).
We observed an increasing trend of honorees who were women in each honor category, especially in the group of ISCB Fellows (see [notebook](https://greenelab.github.io/iscb-diversity/10.visualize-gender.html#sup_fig_s1)), which markedly increased after 2015.
Through 2019, there were a number of years when meetings or ISCB Fellow classes have a high probability of recognizing only male honorees and none that appeared to have exclusively female honorees.


![ISCB Fellows and keynote speakers appear more evenly split between men and women than PubMed authors in recent years, but the proportion has not reached parity. Estimated composition of gender prediction over the years of
  all Pubmed computational biology and bioinformatics journal authors (left),
  and all ISCB Fellows and keynote speakers (right)
  was computed as the average of prediction probabilities of Pubmed articles or ISCB honorees each year.
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/f43f7c40371343a4d8b91438b05c021fdb88af32/figs/gender_breakdown.png){#fig:gender_breakdown width="70%"}

### Predicting Name Origin Groups with LSTM Neural Networks and Wikipedia

Table @tbl:example_names shows the size of the training set for each of the name origin groups as well as a few examples of PubMed author names that had at least 90% prediction probability in that group.
We refer to this dataset as Wiki2019 (available online in [`annotated_names.tsv`](https://github.com/greenelab/wiki-nationality-estimate/blob/master/data/annotated_names.tsv)).

| Group | Training Size | Example Names |
| ------ | ------ | -------------------- |
| Celtic/English names | 154,890 | Adam O Hebb, Oliver G Pybus, David W Ritchie, James WJ Anderson, James W MacDonald, Robert Clarke |
| European names | 78,157 | Tracey M Filzen, Jos H Beijnen, Caroline Louis-Jeune, Christian Lorenzi, Boris Vassilev, Verena Heinrich |
| Hispanic names | 66,931 | Ramón Latorre, Antonio J Jimeno-Yepes, Felipe A Simão, Paulo S L de Oliveira, Juan Carlos Rodríguez-Manzaneque, Natalia Acevedo-Luna |
| East Asian names | 54,588 | Heejoon Chae, Wenchao Jiang, Haizhou Liu, Miho Uchida, Wenxuan Zhang, Jiali Feng |
| Arabic names | 31,418 | Hamidreza Chitsaz, Farzad Sangi, Habib Motieghader, Berke Ç Toptas, Ali Aliyari, Bülent Arman Aksoy |
| Nordic names | 28,978 | Cecilia M Lindgren, Ellen Larsen, Jesper R Gådin, Janne H Korhonen, Johan Åqvist, Jens Nilsson |
| South Asian names | 20,025 | Amitabh Chak, Matthew G Seetin, Matrika Gupta, Sumudu P Leelananda, VS Kumar Kolli, Swanand Gore |
| African names | 17,826 | Timothy Kinyanjui, Jammbe Z Musoro, Nyaradzo M Mgodi, Magambo Phillip Kimuda, Probhonjon Baruah, Adaoha E C Ihekwaba |
| Hebrew names | 4,549 | Alexander J Sadovsky, Boris Shraiman, Gil Goldshlager, Eytan Adar, Aviva Peleg, Nir Esterman |
| Greek names | 4,138 | Gianni Panagiotou, Themis Lazaridis, Eleni Mijalis, Nikolaos Tsiantis, Konstantinos A Kyritsis, Dimitris E Messinis |

Table: **Predicting name-origin groups of names trained on Wikipedia's living people.**
The table lists the 10 groups and the number of living people for each region that the LSTM was trained on.
Example names shows actual author names that received a high prediction for each region.
Full information about which countries comprised each region can be found in the online dataset [`country_to_region.tsv`](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/blob/make-letters/data/countries/2020-01-31_groupings.tsv).
{#tbl:example_names}

We next aimed to predict the name origin groups of honorees and authors.
We constructed a training dataset with more than 700,000 name-nationality pairs by parsing the English-language Wikipedia.
We trained a LSTM neural network on n-grams to predict name groups.
We found similar performance across 1, 2, and 3-grams;
however, because the classifier required fewer epochs to train with 3-grams, we used this length in the model that we term Wiki2019-LSTM.
Our Wiki2019-LSTM returns, for each given name, a probability of that name originating from each of the specified 10 groups.
We observed a multiclass area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) score of 95.9% for the classifier, indicating that the classifier can recapitulate name origins with high sensitivity and specificity.
For each individual group, the high AUC (above 92%, Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}A) suggests that our classifier was sufficient for use in a broad-scale examination of disparities.
We also observed that the model was well calibrated (Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}B).
We also examined potential systematic errors between pairs of name origin groupings with a confusion heatmap and did not find off-diagonal enrichment for any pairing (Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}C).

![The Wiki2019-LSTM model performs well on the testing dataset.
The area under the ROC curve is above 92% for each category, showing strong performance across origin categories (A).
A calibration curve, computed with the caret R package, shows consistency between the predicted probabilities (midpoints of each fixed-width bin) and the observed fraction of names in each bin (B).
Heatmap showing whether names from a given group (x-axis) received higher (purple) or lower (green) predictions for each group (y-axis) than would be expected by group prevalence alone (C).
The values represent log~2~ fold change between the average predicted probability and the prevalence of the corresponding predicted group in the testing dataset (null).
Scaling by group prevalence accounts for the imbalance of groups in the testing dataset.
In all cases, the classifier predicts the true groups above the expected null probability (matrix diagonals are all purple).
For off-diagonal cells, darker green indicates a lower mean prediction compared to the null.
For example, the classifier does not often mistake East Asian names as Greek, but is more prone to mistaking South Asian names as Celtic/English.
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/f43f7c40371343a4d8b91438b05c021fdb88af32/figs/fig_3.png){#fig:wiki2019_lstm width=100%}

### Assessing the Name Origin Diversity of Authors and Honorees

We applied our Wiki2019-LSTM model to both our computational biology honorees dataset and our dataset of corresponding authors.
We found that the proportion of authors with Celtic/English names had decreased (Fig. {@fig:region_breakdown}A, left), particularly for papers published in _Bioinformatics_ and _BMC Bioinformatics_ (see [notebook](https://greenelab.github.io/iscb-diversity/11.visualize-name-origins.html#sup_fig_s4)).
Among keynote speakers and fellows, we found that the majority of honorees are predicted to have Celtic/English or European names (Fig. {@fig:region_breakdown}A, right).
When we directly compared honoree composition with PubMed, we observed discrepancies between the two groups, namely a large overrepresentation of keynote speakers with Celtic/English names (t~418~ = 9.01, _p_ < 10^-16^) and a substantial underrepresentation of keynote speakers with East Asian names (t~454~ = -15.8, _p_ < 10^-16^) (Fig. {@fig:region_breakdown}B).
No statistically significant difference was observed between the proportion of honorees and authors with European names (t~425~ = 0.0282, _p_ = 0.489) or in other categories (see Table @tbl:example_names, t~425~ = -0.176, _p_ = 0.860).


![Compared to the name collection of Pubmed authors, honorees with Celtic/English names are overrepresented while honorees with East Asian names are underrepresented. 
No statistically significant difference was observed between the proportion of honorees and authors with European names or in other categories (see Table @tbl:example_names).
Estimated composition of name origin prediction over the years of
  (A, left) all Pubmed computational biology and bioinformatics journal authors,
  and (A, right) all ISCB Fellows and keynote speakers
  was computed as the average of prediction probabilities of Pubmed articles or ISCB honorees each year.
  (B) For each region, the mean predicted probability of Pubmed articles is shown as teal LOESS curve, and the mean probability and 95% confidence interval of the ISCB honoree predictions are shown as dark circles and vertical lines.

](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/f43f7c40371343a4d8b91438b05c021fdb88af32/figs/region_breakdown.png){#fig:region_breakdown}

### Affiliation Analysis

We analyzed the countries of affiliation between corresponding authors and ISCB honorees.
For each country, we report a value of log~2~ enrichment (LOE) and its 95% confidence intervals (Table @tbl:country-enrichment).
A positive value of LOE indicates a higher proportion of honorees affiliated with that country compared to authors.
A LOE value of 1 represents a one-fold enrichment (i.e., observed number of honorees is twice as much as expected).
In the 20 countries with the most publications, we found an overrepresentation of honorees affiliated with institutions and companies in the US (97 speakers more than expected, LOE = 0.6, 95% CI (0.5, 0.8)) and Israel (12 speakers more than expected, LOR = 1.6, 95% CI (0.9, 2.3)), and an underrepresentation of honorees affiliated with those in China, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Taiwan, and India (Fig. @fig:country-enrichment).

![The overrepresentation of honorees affiliated with institutions and companies in the US and Israel contrasts the underrepresentation of honorees affiliated with those in China, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Taiwan, and India.
Each country's log~2~ enrichment (LOE) and its 95% confidence interval are displayed on the left.
Observed (triangle) and expected (circle) number of honorees and their differences (observed - expected) are shown in square-root scale on the right.
Countries are ordered based on the proportion of authors in the field.

](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/a61b73ed80ba2062d31a1f111c1b8f388fda4b3a/figs/enrichment-plot.png){#fig:country-enrichment width="80%"}

| Country        | Author proportion | Observed | Expected | Observed - Expected | Enrichment | Log~2~(Enrichment) | 95% Confidence Interval |
|----------------|-------------------|----------|----------|---------------------|------------|------------------|-------------------------|
| United States  | 38.76%            | 237.5    | 152.7    | 84.8                | 1.6        | 0.6              | (0.4, 0.8)              |
| United Kingdom | 8.36%             | 36.0     | 32.9     | 3.1                 | 1.1        | 0.1              | (-0.4, 0.6)             |
| Germany        | 7.55%             | 27.0     | 29.7     | -2.7                | 0.9        | -0.1             | (-0.7, 0.4)             |
| China          | 5.82%             | 3.0      | 22.9     | -19.9               | 0.1        | -2.9             | (-5.2, -1.4)            |
| France         | 3.86%             | 4.0      | 15.2     | -11.2               | 0.3        | -1.9             | (-3.8, -0.6)            |
| Italy          | 3.04%             | 2.0      | 12.0     | -10.0               | 0.2        | -2.6             | (-5.6, -0.7)            |
| Canada         | 3.03%             | 12.0     | 11.9     | 0.1                 | 1.0        | 0.0              | (-1, 0.8)               |
| Japan          | 2.44%             | 9.0      | 9.6      | -0.6                | 0.9        | -0.1             | (-1.2, 0.8)             |
| Spain          | 2.39%             | 6.0      | 9.4      | -3.4                | 0.6        | -0.7             | (-2.1, 0.5)             |
| Australia      | 2.33%             | 5.0      | 9.2      | -4.2                | 0.5        | -0.9             | (-2.5, 0.4)             |
| Netherlands    | 1.91%             | 1.0      | 7.5      | -6.5                | 0.1        | -2.9             | (-8.2, -0.4)            |
| Switzerland    | 1.81%             | 7.0      | 7.1      | -0.1                | 1.0        | -0.0             | (-1.4, 1)               |
| Israel         | 1.46%             | 17.5     | 5.8      | 11.7                | 3.0        | 1.6              | (0.8, 2.3)              |
| Sweden         | 1.34%             | 6.0      | 5.3      | 0.7                 | 1.1        | 0.2              | (-1.3, 1.3)             |
| Korea          | 1.30%             | 1.0      | 5.1      | -4.1                | 0.2        | -2.4             | (-7.7, 0.1)             |
| Taiwan         | 1.25%             | 0.0      | 4.9      | -4.9                | 0.0        | -Inf             | (-Inf, -0.4)            |
| India          | 1.20%             | 0.0      | 4.7      | -4.7                | 0.0        | -Inf             | (-Inf, -0.3)            |
| Belgium        | 1.04%             | 1.0      | 4.1      | -3.1                | 0.2        | -2.0             | (-7.3, 0.5)             |
| Singapore      | 0.88%             | 1.0      | 3.5      | -2.5                | 0.3        | -1.8             | (-7.1, 0.7)             |
| Finland        | 0.85%             | 0.0      | 3.4      | -3.4                | 0.0        | -Inf             | (-Inf, 0.1)             |

Table: **Enrichment and depletion in proportion of ISCB honorees compared to Pubmed corresponding authors of 20 countries with the most publications.**
The table lists the countries and their corresponding enrichment, which we computed by dividing the observed proportion of honorees by expected proportion of honorees.
The expected proportion was calculated using corresponding author proportions.
A positive Log~2~(Enrichment) indicated a higher proportion of honorees than corresponding authors affiliated with that country.
The full table with all countries can be browsed interactively in the corresponding [analysis notebook](https://greenelab.github.io/iscb-diversity/12.analyze-affiliation.html#enrichment_tab).
{#tbl:country-enrichment}


### Assessing the Racial and Ethnic Diversity of US-affiliated Authors and Honorees

We predicted the race and ethnicity of US-affiliated authors and honorees using wru, which is based on US census data.
We found that an increasing proportion of authors in computational biology and bioinformatics journals had last names associated with selecting Asian as a race/ethnicity category in the US census (Fig. {@fig:us_racial_makeup}A).
This was primarily driven by publications in _Bioinformatics_ and _BMC Bioinformatics_ (Fig. {@fig:us_racial_makeup}B, top).
We did not observe a corresponding increase at _PLOS Computational Biology_ (Fig. {@fig:us_racial_makeup}B, bottom).
Compared to Pubmed authors, ISCB honorees with US affiliations have a higher proportion of individuals whose last names we associated with selecting white as a race/ethnicity category in the US census (Fig. {@fig:us_racial_makeup}C vs. A).
Separating honoree results by honor category did not reveal any clear differences (Fig. {@fig:us_racial_makeup}D).

![We find an overrepresentation of white and underrepresentation of Asian honorees as compared to authors. Estimated composition of census-based race/ethnicity prediction over the years of
  (A) all Pubmed computational biology and bioinformatics journal authors,
  (B) authors in each journal,
  (C) all ISCB Fellows and keynote speakers,
  and (D) ISCB honorees in each honor category
  was computed as the average of prediction probabilities of Pubmed articles or ISCB honorees each year.
  For each race/ethnicity category, the mean predicted probability of Pubmed articles is shown as teal LOESS curve, and the mean probability and 95% confidence interval of the ISCB honoree predictions are shown as dark circles and vertical lines (E).

](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/f43f7c40371343a4d8b91438b05c021fdb88af32/figs/us_racial_makeup.png){#fig:us_racial_makeup}

We directly compared honoree and author results from 1993 to 2019 for the predicted proportion of white, Asian, and other categories (Fig. {@fig:us_racial_makeup}E).
We found that, over the years, white honorees have been significantly overrepresented (t~218~ = 14.8, _p_ < 10^-16^) and Asian honorees have been significantly underrepresented (t~236~ = -18.8, _p_ < 10^-16^).
A Welch two-sample t-test did not reveal any statistically significant difference in the mean probability of ISCB speakers predicted to be in Other categories compared to authors (t~203~ = 1.79, _p_ = 0.0747).

### Assessing the Name Origin Diversity of US-affiliated Authors and Honorees

We applied our Wiki2019-LSTM model to US-affiliated authors and honorees and found similar pattern as when we considered all authors and honorees.
We note that the US was not included in the training of the Wiki2019-LSTM model (see Methods).
Specifically, the proportion of authors with Celtic/English names had decreased (Fig. {@fig:us_name_origin}A, left), particularly for papers published in _Bioinformatics_ and _BMC Bioinformatics_ (see [notebook](https://greenelab.github.io/iscb-diversity/14.us-name-origin.html#sup_fig_s6)).
Meanwhile, the majority of honorees are predicted to have Celtic/English or European names (Fig. {@fig:us_name_origin}A, right).
When we directly compared honoree composition with PubMed, we observed discrepancies between the two groups, namely a large overrepresentation of honorees with Celtic/English names (t~247~ = 6.46, _p_ < 10^-9^), a smaller overrepresentation of honorees with European names (t~250~ = 2.54, _p_ = 0.0059), and a substantial underrepresentation of honorees with East Asian names (t~329~ = -20.6, _p_ < 10^-16^) (Fig. {@fig:us_name_origin}B).


![Compared to the name collection of US-affiliated Pubmed authors, US-affiliated honorees with Celtic/English and European names are overrepresented while US-affiliated honorees with East Asian names are underrepresented.
No statistically significant difference was observed between the proportion of honorees and authors with names in other categories (see Table @tbl:example_names, t~252~ = -0.152, _p_ = 0.879).
Estimated composition of name origin prediction over the years of
  (A, left) US-affiliated journal authors,
  and (A, right) all US-affiliated Fellows and keynote speakers
  was computed as the average of prediction probabilities of US-affiliated corresponding authors or ISCB honorees each year.
  (B) For each region, the mean predicted probability of US-affiliated corresponding authors is shown as teal LOESS curve, and the mean probability and 95% confidence interval of the US-affiliated ISCB honoree predictions are shown as dark circles and vertical lines.

](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/f43f7c40371343a4d8b91438b05c021fdb88af32/figs/us_name_origin.png){#fig:us_name_origin}

### Reception & Feedback

We released [version 1.0](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/releases/tag/v1.0) of our manuscript on 2020-01-30.
We submitted this version to the 28^th^ annual ISMB conference planned for July 2020 in Montreal.
The study received public feedback almost immediately.
Specifically, a community member [pointed out](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/27) problems with the country-group names we imported from NamePrism.

On 2020-02-20, ISCB released a [statement on equity and inclusion](https://www.iscb.org/iscb-news-items/4257-2020-feb20-iscb-announcement) that alluded to our study, but did not directly name or link to it.
The statement contained the following paragraph:

> We continually revisit our procedures for progress towards equity and inclusion and assess their efficacy.
> We do not think that automated procedures of assessment are appropriate for this purpose.
> Algorithms performing such categorization suffer from inherent limitations that distort the notion of balance we are striving for.
> Specifically, categorization of disjoint regional, ethnic or gender groups of scientists, while easing classification, also functions divisively.

Our ISMB submission was reviewed by 5 peer reviewers and [rejected](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/37) on 2020-03-13.
We thank the reviewers for their input, and have made our [responses public](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/blob/master/content/response-to-reviewers.md)).

Much of the feedback centered around the inherent imperfections of automated detection of race or nationality.
Therefore, we expanded our assessment to include country of affiliation, which can be detected with high fidelity from PubMed metadata.
Adding affiliation information allowed us to examine disparities within a single country and to rule out geographic disparities as the sole factor leading to an underrepresentation of Asian honorees.

We appreciate the feedback we have received.
Early indications suggest ISCB may be heeding the findings of our analysis and increasing the diversity of honorees.
TODO: recent ISCB honorees & actions.
