## Discussion

There are significant technical and ethical challenges that one faces in carrying out retrospective work to examine the fairness of scientific practices.
A major technical challenge was to narrow down geographic origins for some groups of names.
Specific name origin groups, such as Hispanic names, are geographically disparate.
We were unable to construct a classifier that could distinguish names from Iberian countries (Spain and Portugal) from those in Latin America in the group of Hispanic names.
Discrepancies in representation between these groups are thus undetectable by our classifier.
Honoree counts of those with Hispanic names are influenced from Spain as well as Latin America.
In such cases, our analyses may substantially understate the extent to which minoritized scientists are underrepresented among honorees and authors.
Another technical challenge is that supervised machine learning approaches are neither error free nor bias free.
By integrating different lines of evidence and preserving uncertainty by analyzing prediction probabilities rather than applying a hard assignment for each prediction, we aimed to alleviate method-specific biases and discover insightful findings that correctly reflect the current representation diversity at conferences.

A key ethical challenge with retrospective work to examine disparities is that algorithmic approaches to infer characteristics are often required.
This leads to significant limitations such as considering gender as a binary variable.
While this situation limits retroactive examination, there is a substantial opportunity for scientific societies, grant-making organizations, publishers, and others to proactively collect self-identified demographic information.
It is equally crucial that this information is properly used to continuously evaluate inclusion practices.

A difficulty that straddles the ethical and technical divide for studies examining the representation of honorees is that the background that can be best assessed, which we assess here, is the current field composition.
Scientific societies exist to promote the discipline, and many, including ISCB, include diversity as a value.
In these cases, the ideal background distribution would be the population of senior computational biologists in the absence of systemic barriers to participation.
The implication would be that scientific societies exist to reflect what the field could be, not just what it is.
However, we are limited to measuring the field as it is.
Furthermore, authorships, which we use to assess the field's composition, are also affected by systemic barriers to participation.
We estimated the composition of the field using last author status, but in neuroscience [@doi:10.1101/275362] and other disciplines [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2004956], women are underrepresented in this position.
Such an effect would cause us to underestimate the number of women in the field.
Similarly, other studies have showed that underrepresented groups are less likely to be last authors [@doi:10.1257/pandp.20181111], and Hispanic and Black scientists were underrepresented in academic publishing in general [@doi:10.1007/s11192-012-0893-4].
Thus, systemic barriers that reduce representation within our estimation of the field would reduce apparent disparities in honor distributions as long as those systemic barriers did not also have a particular influence on the honoree selection process as well.

An important ethical question to ask when measuring representation is what the right level of representation is.
Societies should examine their processes to determine whether the process of selecting honorees should be equal or equitable.
For example, we found similar representation of women between authors and honorees, which suggests honoree diversity is similar to that of authors and that there may be equality during the honoree selection process.
However, if fewer women are in the field because of systemic factors that inhibit their participation, reaching equality is not equivalent to reaching equity.
In addition to holding fewer corresponding authorship positions, on average, female scientists of different disciplines are cited less often [@arxiv:2001.01002, @doi:10.1002/ece3.4993, @doi:10.1038/s41550-017-0141, @pmid:24350369], invited by journals to submit papers less often [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2004956], suggested as reviewers less often [@doi:10.1038/541455a], and receive significantly worse review scores [@doi:10.1002/ece3.4993].
Meanwhile, a review of women's underrepresentation in math-intensive fields argued that today's underrepresentation is not explained by historic forms of discrimination but factors surrounding fertility decisions and lifestyle choices, whether freely made or constrained by biology and society [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1014871108].
A recent analysis of gender inequality across different disciplines showed that, although both gender groups have equivalent annual productivity, women scientists have higher dropout rates throughout their scientific careers [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1914221117].
Therefore, although we found that ISCB's honorees and keynote speakers appear to have similar gender proportion to the field as a whole, the gender proportions have not reached parity.
To the extent that this gap is due to systemic barriers, the process may have reached equality but not equity.

It is also possible to have processes that reach neither equality nor equity.
We find that honorees include significantly fewer people of color than the field as a whole, and Asian scientists are dramatically underrepresented among honorees.
Because invitation and honor patterns could be driven by biases associated with name groups, geography, or other factors, we cross-referenced name group predictions with author affiliations to disentangle the relationship between geographic regions, name groups and invitation probabilities.
We found that disparities persisted even within the group of honorees with a US affiliation.
Societies' honoree selection process failing to reflect the diversity of the field can play a part in why minoritized scientists' innovations are discounted [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1915378117].
Although we estimate the fraction of non-White and non-Asian authors to be relatively similar to the estimated honoree rate, we note that both are represented at levels substantially lower than in the US population.

Societies, both through their honorees and the individuals who deliver keynotes at their meetings, can play a positive role in improving the presence of female STEM role models, which can boost young students' interests in STEM [@doi:10.1073/pnas.1014871108] and, for example, lead to higher persistence for undergraduate women in geoscience [@doi:10.1130/GES01659.1].
Efforts are underway to create Wikipedia entries for more female [@doi:10.1038/d41586-018-05947-8] and black, Asian, and minority scientists [@doi:10.1038/d41586-019-00812-8], which can help early-career scientists identify role models.
Societies can contribute toward equity if they design policies to honor scientists in ways that counter these biases such as ensuring diversity in the selection committees.

The central role that scientists play in evaluating each other and each other's findings makes equity critical.
Even many nominally objective methods of assessing excellence (e.g., h-index, grant funding obtained, number of high-impact peer-reviewed publications, and total number of peer-reviewed publications) are subject to the bias of peers during review.
These could be affected by explicit biases, implicit biases, or pernicious biases in which a reviewer might consider a path of inquiry, as opposed to an individual, to be more or less meritorious based on the reviewer's own background [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaw7238, @doi:10.1101/400515].
Our efforts to measure the diversity of honorees in an international society suggests that, while a focus on gender parity may be improving some aspects of diversity among honorees, contributions from scientists of color are underrecognized.
