## Conclusions

A major challenge that we faced in carrying out this work is to predict precise geographic origins for some groups of names.
For example, we were unable to construct a classifier that could distinguish between names from Iberia (Spain and Portugal) and names from Spanish and Portuguese-speaking countries in Latin America.
Discrepancies in representation between these groups are thus undetectable by our classifier.
Hispanic honoree counts are influenced from Spain as well as Latin America.
In these cases, our analyses may substantially understate the extent to which minoritized scientists are underrepresented among honorees and authors.

Biases in authorship practices may also cause us to underestimate the composition of minoritized scientists within the field.
We estimate the composition of the field using corresponding author status, but in neuroscience [@doi:10.1101/275362] and other disciplines [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2004956] women are underrepresented among such authors.
Such an effect would cause us to underestimate the number of women in the field.
Though this effect has been studied with respect to gender, we are not aware of similar work examining race, ethnicity, or nationality.

An important questions to ask when measuring representation is what the right level of representation is.
We suggest that considering equity may be more appropriate than strictly diversity.
In addition to holding fewer corresponding authorship positions, on average, female scientists of different disciplines are cited less often [@arxiv:2001.01002, @doi:10.1002/ece3.4993], invited by journals to submit papers less often [@doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2004956], suggested as reviewers less often [@doi:10.1038/541455a], and receive significantly worse review scores [@doi:10.1002/ece3.4993].
Societies, both through their honorees and the individuals who deliver keynotes at their meetings, can play a positive role in improving the presence of female STEM role models, which, for example, may lead to higher persistence for undergraduate women in geoscience [@doi:10.1130/GES01659.1].
Efforts are underway to create Wikipedia entries for more female [@doi:10.1038/d41586-018-05947-8] and black, Asian, and minority scientists [@doi:10.1038/d41586-019-00812-8], which can help early-career scientists identify role models.
We find that ISCB's honorees and keynote speakers, though not yet reaching gender parity, appear to be more evenly split between men and women than the field as a whole.
On the other hand, honorees include significantly fewer people of color than the field as a whole, and Asian scientists are dramatically underrepresented among honorees.
Though we estimate the fraction of non-white and non-Asian authors to be relatively similar to the estimated honoree rate, we note that both are represented at levels substantially lower than in the US population.
Societies can play a positive role in enhancing equity if they design policies to honor scientists in ways that counter these biases.

The central role that scientists play in evaluating each other and each other's findings makes equity critical.
Even many nominally objective methods of assessing excellence (e.g. h-index, grant funding obtained, number of high-impact peer-reviewed publications, and total number of peer-reviewed publications) are subject to the bias of peers during review.
These could be affected by explicit biases, implicit biases, or pernicious biases in which a reviewer might consider a path of inquiry, as opposed to an individual, to be more or less meritorious based on the reviewer's own background [@doi:10.1126/sciadv.aaw7238].
Our efforts to measure the diversity of honorees in an international society suggests that, while a focus on gender parity may be improving some aspects of diversity among honorees, contributions from scientists of color are underrecognized.
