## Materials and Methods

### Honoree Curation

From [ISCB's webpage listing **ISCB Distinguished Fellows**](http://web.archive.org/web/20200116150052/https://www.iscb.org/iscb-fellows), we found recipients listed by their full names for the years 2009--2019.
We gleaned the full name of the Fellow as well as the year in which they received the honor.
We identified major ISCB-associated conferences as those designated flagship (ISMB) or those that had been held on many continents (RECOMB).
To identify **ISMB Keynote Speakers**, we examined the webpage for each ISMB meeting.
The invited speakers at ISMB before 2001 were listed in the Preface pages of each year's proceedings, which were archived in the [ISMB collection](https://aaai.org/Library/ISMB/ismb-library.php) of the AAAI digital library.
We found full names of all keynote speakers for the years 1993--2019.

For the RECOMB meeting, we found conference webpages with keynote speakers for 1999, 2000, 2001, 2004, 2007, 2008, and 2010--2019.
We were able to fill in the missing years using information from the RECOMB 2016 proceedings, which summarizes the first 20 years of the RECOMB conference [@doi:10.1007/978-3-319-31957-5].
This volume has two tables of keynote speakers from 1997--2006 (Table 14, page XXVII) and 2007--2016 (Table 4, page 8).
Using these tables to verify the conference speaker lists, we arrived at two special instances of inclusion/exclusion.
Although Jun Wang was not included in these tables, we were able to confirm that he was a keynote speaker in 2011 with the RECOMB 2011 proceedings [@doi:10.1007/978-3-642-20036-6], and thus we included this speaker in the dataset.
Marian Walhout was invited as a keynote speaker but had to [cancel](http://recomb2015.mimuw.edu.pl/node/18.html) the talk due to other obligations.
Because her name was neither mentioned in the 2015 proceedings [@doi:10.1007/978-3-319-16706-0] nor in the above-mentioned tables, we excluded this speaker from our dataset.

#### Name processing

When extracting honoree names, we began with the full name as provided on the site.
Because our prediction methods required separated first and last names, we chose the first non-initial name as the first name and the final name as the last name.
We did not consider a hyphen to be a name separator:
for hyphenated names, all components were included.
For metadata from PubMed and PMC where first (fore) and last names are coded separately, we applied the same cleaning steps.
We created [functions to simplify names](https://git.dhimmel.com/pubmedpy/names.html) in the pubmedpy Python package to support standardized fore and last name processing.


### Last author extraction

We assumed that, in the list of authors for a specific paper, last authors (often research advisors) would be most likely to be invited for keynotes or to be honored as Fellows.
Therefore, we utilized [PubMed](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) to retrieve last author names to assess the composition of the field.
PubMed is a search engine resource provided by the US National Library of Medicine and index scholarly articles.
PubMed contains a record for every article published in journals it indexes (30 million records total circa 2020), within which we were able to extract author first and last names and their order using the E-Utilities APIs.
To automate and generalize these tasks, we created the [pubmedpy](https://github.com/dhimmel/pubmedpy) Python package.

From PubMed, we compiled a catalog of 174,397 journal articles that were published from 1993 through 2019, written in English, and tagged with the MeSH term ["computational biology"](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/?term=%22Computational+Biology%22%5BMeSH+Terms%5D+), which includes categories such as genomics and systems biology and is [equivalent](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/68019295) to "bioinformatics". 
Excluding 163 articles with no author information and years with less than 200 articles/year, we analyzed 173,735 articles from 1998--2019.

### Countries of Affiliations

TODO [to revise]

Publications often provide affiliation lists for authors, which generally associate authors with research organizations and their corresponding physical addresses.
We implemented affiliation extraction in the pubmedpy Python package for both PubMed and PMC XML records.
These methods extract a sequence of textual affiliations for each author.
While ideally each affiliation record would refer to one and only one research organization, sometimes journals deposit multiple affiliations in a single structured affiliation.
For example, we extracted the following composite affiliation for all authors of [PMC4147893](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4147893/):

> 'Multimodal Computing and Interaction', Saarland University & Department for Computational Biology and Applied Computing, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, 66123 Saarland, Germany, Ray and Stephanie Lane Center for Computational Biology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, 15206 PA, USA, Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195 Berlin, Germany, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR7238, CNRS-UPMC, Paris, France and CNRS, UMR7238, Laboratory of Computational and Quantitative Biology, Paris, France.

We designed a method for extracting countries from affiliations that accommodated multiple countries.
We relied on two Python utilities to extract countries from text: [geotext](https://github.com/elyase/geotext) and [`geopy.geocoders.Nominatim`](https://geopy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/#nominatim).
The first, geotext, used regular expressions to find mentions of places from the [GeoNames database](http://www.geonames.org/).
In the above text, geotext detected four mentions of places in Germany: Saarland, Saarbrücken, Saarland, Germany.
Anytime geotext identified 2 or more mentions of a country, we labeled the affiliation as including that country.

`geopy.geocoders.Nominatim` converts names / addresses to geographic coordinates using the OpenStreetMap's [Nomatim](https://nominatim.org/) service.
We split textual affiliations by punctuation and found the first segment, in reverse order, that returned any Nomatim search results.
For the above affiliation, the search order was "France", "Paris", "Laboratory of Computational and Quantitative Biology", etcetera.
Since searching "France" returns a match by Nomatim, the following queries would not be made.
When a match was found, we extracted the country containing the location.
This approach returns a single country for an affiliation when successful.
When labeling affiliations with countries, we only used these values when geotext did not return results or had ambiguity amongst countries without multiple matches.
For more details on this approach, consult the accompanying [notebook](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/blob/5213ba3451520af3967f74d8f58553dade0a826c/07.affiliations-to-countries.ipynb) and [label dataset](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/blob/5213ba3451520af3967f74d8f58553dade0a826c/data/affiliations/geocode.jsonl).

Our ability to assign countries to authors was largely driven by the availability of affiliations.
In our catalog of last authors, 95.7% of authors from PubMed Central records were assigned at least one country.
[The country-assignment-rate for last authors from PubMed records was only 32.2%. 
This reflects the varying availability of affiliation metadata by journal.
Countries were assigned to last authors of 99.9% of articles in _BMC Bioinformatics_ 98.7% in _PLOS Computational Biology_, and 49.6% in _Bioinformatics_.
Country assignment for last authors in _Bioinformatics_ were unavailable for over half of all articles annually from 1998--2013.
_Bioinformatics_ affiliation metadata improved starting in 2014, and the country-assignment-rate has hovered around ~95% for the last few years (see [notebook](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/blob/a7fcc7c229672b56626f0dc68d04064079ff3a49/08.corresponding-authors.ipynb)).]

For ISCB honorees, during the curation process, if an honoree was listed with their affiliation at the time, we recorded this affiliation for analysis.
For ISCB Fellows, we used the affiliation listed on the ISCB page.
Because we could not find affiliations for the 1997 and 1998 RECOMB keynote speakers' listed for these years, they were left blank.
If an author or speaker had more than one affiliation, each was inversely weighted by the number of affiliations that individual had.

### Estimation of Gender

We predicted the gender of honorees and authors using the <https://genderize.io> API, which was trained on over 100 million name-gender pairings collected from the web and is one of the three widely-used gender inference services that provide gender classifications with over 98% accuracy [@doi:10.7717/peerj-cs.156].
We used author and honoree first names to retrieve predictions from genderize.io.
The predictions represent the probability of an honoree or author being male or female.
We used the estimated probabilities and did not convert to a hard group assignment.
For example, a query to <https://genderize.io> on January 26, 2020 for "Casey" returns a probability of male of 0.74 and a probability of female of 0.26, which we would add for an author with this first name.
Because of the limitations of considering gender as a binary trait and inferring it from first names, we only consider predictions in aggregate and not as individual values for specific scientists.

Of 412 ISCB honorees, genderize.io fails to provide gender predictions for one name.
Of 173,735 last authors, 1,002 were missing a fore name in the raw paper metadata and 11,427 had fore names consisting of only initials.
Specifically, the metadata for most papers before 2002 (2,566 out of 2,601 papers) only have initials for first and/or middle author names.
Without gender predictions for these names, we consider only articles from 2002 on when comparing gender compositions between two groups.
Of the remaining authors, genderize.io failed to predict gender for 9,845 of these fore names.
We note that approximately 42% of these NA predictions are hyphenated names, which is likely because they are more unique and thus are more difficult to find predictions for.
82% of these names were predicted to be of Asian origin by last name (see the race/ethnicity prediction model below).
This bias of NA predictions toward non-English names has been previously observed [@doi:10.32614/RJ-2016-002] and may have a minor influence on the final estimate of gender compositions.

### Estimation of Name Origin Groups

We developed a model to predict geographical origins of names.
The existing Python package ethnicolr [@arxiv:1805.02109] produces reasonable predictions, but its international representation in the data curated from Wikipedia in 2009 [@doi:10.1145/1557019.1557032] is still limited.
For instance, 76% of the names in ethnicolr's Wikipedia dataset are European in origin.

To address these limitations in ethnicolr, we built a similar classifier, a Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) neural network, to infer the region of origin from patterns in the sequences of letters in full names.
We applied this model on an updated, approximately 4.5 times larger training dataset called Wiki2019 (described below).
We tested multiple character sequence lengths and, based on this comparison, selected tri-characters for the primary results described in this work.
We trained our prediction model on 80% of the Wiki2019 dataset and evaluated its performance using the remaining 20%.
This model, which we term Wiki2019-LSTM, is available in the online file [`LSTM.h5`](https://github.com/greenelab/wiki-nationality-estimate/blob/master/models/LSTM.h5).

To generate a training dataset for name origin prediction that reflects a modern naming landscape, we scraped the English Wikipedia's category of [Living People](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Living_people).
This category, which contained approximately 930,000 pages at the time of processing in November 2019, is regularly curated and allowed us to avoid pages related to non-persons.
For each Wikipedia page, we used two strategies to find a full birth name and location context for that person.
First, we used information from the personal details sidebar; the information in this sidebar varied widely but often contained a full name and a place of birth.
Second, in the body of the text of most English-language biographical Wikipedia pages, the first sentence usually begins with, for example, "John Edward Smith (born 1 January 1970) is an American novelist known for ..."
This structure comes from editor [guidance on biography articles](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wikipedia:Manual_of_Style/Biography#Context) and is designed to capture:

> ... the country of which the person is a citizen, national or permanent resident, or if the person is notable mainly for past events, the country where the person was a citizen, national or permanent resident when the person became notable.

We used regular expressions to parse out the person's name from this structure and checked that the expression after "is a" matched a list of nationalities.
We were able to define a name and nationality for 708,493 people by using the union of these strategies.
This process produced country labels that were more fine-grained than the broader patterns that we sought to examine among honorees and authors.
We initially grouped names by continent, but later decided to model our categorization after the hierarchical taxonomy used by [NamePrism](http://www.name-prism.com/about) [@doi:10.1145/3132847.3133008].
The NamePrism taxonomy was derived from name-country pairs by producing an embedding of names by Twitter contact patterns and then grouping countries using the similarity of names from those countries.
The countries associated with each grouping are shown in Fig {@fig:nameprism_countries}.
NamePrism excluded the US, Canada and Australia because these countries have been populated by a mix of immigrant groups [@doi:10.1145/3132847.3133008].

![NamePrism groups countries by name similarity. We used this grouping but renamed the groups to focus on the linguistic patterns based on name etymology identified by NamePrism.
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/20d21504463c0487aa844be0ff236b3a51c70fa4/figs/2020-01-31_groupings.png){#fig:nameprism_countries width="90%"}

In an earlier version of this manuscript, we also used category names derived from NamePrism, but a reader [pointed out](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity-manuscript/issues/27) the titles of the groupings were problematic;
therefore, in this version, we renamed these groupings to reflect that the NamePrism approach primarily identifies groups based on linguistic patterns from name etymology rather than religious or racial similarities.
We note that our mapping from nationality to name origins was not without error.
For example, a scientist of Israeli nationality may not bear a Hebrew name.
These mismatches were assessed via the heatmap of the model performance (Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}C) and complemented by the affiliation analysis below.
An alternative approach is to assign arbitrary names to these groups such as via letter coding (e.g., A, B, C, etc.), but we did not choose this strategy because ten arbitrary letters for ten groups can greatly reduce the paper's readibility.


### Predicting Name Origin Groups with LSTM Neural Networks and Wikipedia

Table @tbl:example_names shows the size of the training set for each of the name origin groups as well as a few examples of PubMed author names that had at least 90% prediction probability in that group.
We refer to this dataset as Wiki2019 (available online in [`annotated_names.tsv`](https://github.com/greenelab/wiki-nationality-estimate/blob/master/data/annotated_names.tsv)).

| Group | Training Size | Example Names |
| ------ | ------ | -------------------- |
| Celtic/English names | 154,890 | Adam O Hebb, Oliver G Pybus, David W Ritchie, James WJ Anderson, James W MacDonald, Robert Clarke |
| European names | 78,157 | Tracey M Filzen, Jos H Beijnen, Caroline Louis-Jeune, Christian Lorenzi, Boris Vassilev, Verena Heinrich |
| Hispanic names | 66,931 | Ramón Latorre, Antonio J Jimeno-Yepes, Felipe A Simão, Paulo S L de Oliveira, Juan Carlos Rodríguez-Manzaneque, Natalia Acevedo-Luna |
| East Asian names | 54,588 | Heejoon Chae, Wenchao Jiang, Haizhou Liu, Miho Uchida, Wenxuan Zhang, Jiali Feng |
| Arabic names | 31,418 | Hamidreza Chitsaz, Farzad Sangi, Habib Motieghader, Berke Ç Toptas, Ali Aliyari, Bülent Arman Aksoy |
| Nordic names | 28,978 | Cecilia M Lindgren, Ellen Larsen, Jesper R Gådin, Janne H Korhonen, Johan Åqvist, Jens Nilsson |
| South Asian names | 20,025 | Amitabh Chak, Matthew G Seetin, Matrika Gupta, Sumudu P Leelananda, VS Kumar Kolli, Swanand Gore |
| African names | 17,826 | Timothy Kinyanjui, Jammbe Z Musoro, Nyaradzo M Mgodi, Magambo Phillip Kimuda, Probhonjon Baruah, Adaoha E C Ihekwaba |
| Hebrew names | 4,549 | Alexander J Sadovsky, Boris Shraiman, Gil Goldshlager, Eytan Adar, Aviva Peleg, Nir Esterman |
| Greek names | 4,138 | Gianni Panagiotou, Themis Lazaridis, Eleni Mijalis, Nikolaos Tsiantis, Konstantinos A Kyritsis, Dimitris E Messinis |

Table: **Predicting name-origin groups of names trained on Wikipedia's living people.**
The table lists the 10 groups and the number of living people for each region that the LSTM was trained on.
Example names shows actual author names that received a high prediction for each region.
Full information about which countries comprised each region can be found in the online dataset [`country_to_region.tsv`](https://github.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/blob/make-letters/data/countries/2020-01-31_groupings.tsv).
{#tbl:example_names}

We next aimed to predict the name origin groups of honorees and authors.
We constructed a training dataset with more than 700,000 name-nationality pairs by parsing the English-language Wikipedia.
We trained a LSTM neural network on n-grams to predict name groups.
We found similar performance across 1, 2, and 3-grams;
however, because the classifier required fewer epochs to train with 3-grams, we used this length in the model that we term Wiki2019-LSTM.
Our Wiki2019-LSTM returns, for each given name, a probability of that name originating from each of the specified 10 groups.
We observed a multiclass area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) score of 95.9% for the classifier, indicating that the classifier can recapitulate name origins with high sensitivity and specificity.
For each individual group, the high AUC (above 92%, Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}A) suggests that our classifier was sufficient for use in a broad-scale examination of disparities.
We also observed that the model was well calibrated (Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}B).
We also examined potential systematic errors between pairs of name origin groupings with a confusion heatmap and did not find off-diagonal enrichment for any pairing (Fig. {@fig:wiki2019_lstm}C).

![The Wiki2019-LSTM model performs well on the testing dataset.
The area under the ROC curve is above 92% for each category, showing strong performance across origin categories (A).
A calibration curve, computed with the caret R package, shows consistency between the predicted probabilities (midpoints of each fixed-width bin) and the observed fraction of names in each bin (B).
Heatmap showing whether names from a given group (x-axis) received higher (purple) or lower (green) predictions for each group (y-axis) than would be expected by group prevalence alone (C).
The values represent log~2~ fold change between the average predicted probability and the prevalence of the corresponding predicted group in the testing dataset (null).
Scaling by group prevalence accounts for the imbalance of groups in the testing dataset.
In all cases, the classifier predicts the true groups above the expected null probability (matrix diagonals are all purple).
For off-diagonal cells, darker green indicates a lower mean prediction compared to the null.
For example, the classifier does not often mistake East Asian names as Greek, but is more prone to mistaking South Asian names as Celtic/English.
](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/greenelab/iscb-diversity/20d21504463c0487aa844be0ff236b3a51c70fa4/figs/fig_3.png){#fig:wiki2019_lstm width=100%}

Applying Wiki2019-LSTM on the author and honoree datasets, we obtained name origin estimates for all honorees' and authors' name, except the 12,429 that did not have fore names (see breakdown in the Estimation of Gender section above).
Once again, because the large majority of author fore names prior to 2002 were recorded with initials only, predictions were not possible, and we excluded 1998--2001 when comparing name origin compositions between two groups.

### Affiliation Analysis

For each country, we computed the expected number of honorees by multiplying the proportion of authors whose affiliations were in that country with the total number of honorees.
We then performed an enrichment analysis to examine the difference in country affiliation proportions between ISCB honorees and field-specific last authors.
We calculated each country's enrichment by dividing the observed proportion of honorees by the expected proportion of honorees.
The 95% confidence interval of the log~2~ enrichment was estimated using the Poisson model method [@isbn:978-0849394447, page 17-18].

### Estimation of Race and Ethnicity within the US

The underlying data used for race and ethnicity prediction are derived from the US Census, in which an individual's race and ethnicity are based on their self-identification with one or more groups.
Specifically, the race categories include White, Black or African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, Other race, and Two or more races [@url:https://factfinder.census.gov/help/en/race.htm], and ethnicity categories include Hispanic/Latino or Not Hispanic/Latino [@url:https://web.archive.org/web/20010405061504/http://www.census.gov/Press-Release/www/2001/raceqandas.html].
We made race and ethnicity predictions of the surnames of US-affiliated authors and honorees using the R package wru, which implements methods described in Imai and Khanna [@doi:10.1093/pan/mpw001].
wru uses similar race/ethnicity categories as in the Census but groups American Indian or Alaska Native and Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander to form the Other category.
In the case of names that were not observed in the census, wru's *predict_race()* function outputs the average demographic distribution from the census, which may produce misleading results.
To avoid this suboptimal imputation, we modified the function to return a status denoting that results were inconclusive (NA) instead.
This prediction represents the probability of an honoree or author selecting a certain race or ethnicity on a census form if they lived within the US.

Of 239 US-affiliated ISCB honoree entries, wru fails to provide race/ethnicity predictions for 45 names.
Of 26,771 US-affiliated last authors, 5,020 had a last name for which wru did not provide predictions.
One limitation of wru and other methods that infer race, ethnicity, or nationality from last names is the potentially inaccurate prediction for scientists who changed their last name during marriage, a practice more common among women than men.

### Statistical analysis

We estimated the levels of representation by performing the following regression of the prediction probability on the group of scientists while controlling for year:
$$prob = \beta_0 + \beta_1 g + \beta_2 y + \epsilon.$$
The dependent variable $prob$ is the prediction probablity of a demographic variable (gender, race/ethnicity, and name origin) for names of scientists in g $g$ (honoree or author) during year $y$. 
$\epsilon \sim N(0, \sigma^2)$ accounts for random variation.




